gamma rays and cosmic rays and shock
waves what's your best way to create
high energy phenomenon once we had the
large hydrant collider going from the
rates of bajillions of collisions that
they're doing there we were able to
figure out basically the interaction
rate of protons at those High energies
so you have muons in your exotic places
in the universe mhm but I hear that we
also detect muons here on Earth the
Earth's atmosphere is a bright bright
gamma ray background so that particle
shower these extensive air showers
they'll come flying in and those muons
will stream down to the surface a
thousand just went through your body do
you gotta love science people you just
got to love
[Music]
it this is Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson
your personal astrophysicist we got a
cosmic queries lined up for you and that
means I got Chuck Nice in the house
that's right what's up Neil all right
good feeling good good you know
mining my colleagues once again sounds
illegal Tim pagone Tim how you doing man
all right welcome to Star Talk your
first time thanks yeah have we known
each other how long probably like 20
years man welcome to the show you're a
fellow astrophysicist you're a professor
at the City University of New York nice
at The Graduate uh College excellent and
at York College one of the campuses of
the CUNY system and and we have astrom
here and what is astrom short for so uh
full name's astrom NYC and the Astro the
Comm and astrom is community so it's all
about building Community okay and you'd
Mentor students within that Community
yep it's been 74 74 students yeah we've
been going for a dozen years now yeah CU
not good enough just to be a scientist
if you just you know live on an island
right you got to pass the torch at some
point let go share the torch yeah that's
a good is
yes where scientists are actually
bringing up other scientists right they
don't vote you off the they don't vote
you off the island they bring you into
the island yeah unless you say you
believe in astrology then they're like
you got to get out no a good educator
will then show them why that's an error
but let's be honest let's just be honest
here then you then you vote him
up so one of the reasons why we have you
here is you've done a lot of thinking
and a lot of observing and a lot of
publishing about extreme objects in the
universe and people love them some
extreme things everybody loves extremes
we love it so you go bigger you go home
yes yeah super fun that's the stuff yeah
so as we as we Ascend the
electromagnetic spectrum in energy and
we go red orange yellow green blue
violet M I left that you skipped it I
skipped Indigo cuz Indigo doesn't belong
there that's Isaac Newton being
mystically fascinated by you broke up B
Biv devau
I don't
think
not Roy G B right so Violet and then
ultraviolet mhm which can give you skin
cancer MH and then x-rays which will
give you bone cancer
bone and now gamma rays that turn you
into a Hulk so so they go right through
you so tell me about what makes gamma
rays in the universe because we know
stars make regular light and we also
know black holes in their vicinity they
can heat up the gases and they'll
radiate ultraviolet and x-rays but gamma
rays seem to just come from their own
places yeah it's the most energetic
light that there is so you need a really
super energetic process so you have to
blow stump then up or have a huge shock
run through an area to accelerate
particles to nearly the speed of light
shock means something very specific in
astrophysics so tell us about that CU
otherwise shock what is mean anywhere oh
dear that's not what we mean did you see
what that black hole
did you were shocked by the shock yes so
so I mean simply put in in a certain
area there's a there's a speed of sound
and if you go beyond that that's a shock
you make a shock you make a shock right
yeah right just go beyond it like so you
need a process that will overtake
something as fast as the speed of sound
in that Medium that's right so like an
explosion if a star explodes it's a
supernova it'll send a shock wave out
through the interstellar medium and
that'll Bunch up all the gas into high
density it'll Bunch up all the magnetic
field so so let me ask you this yeah
when you look at wasn't he in the middle
of explaining something no it's co no
that was okay so in the medium itself
all right air is the medium through
which the shock wave of sound travels
right sound that we the sound that we
that we're doing right now here on Earth
here on Earth M so in space if it's a
vacuum what exactly is the shock
traveling on good question yeah there's
always a little bit of something going
on out there oh yeah and so anytime
there's any kind of
discontinuity it it we would also
describe as a shock and the things that
I'm most interested that'll create gamma
rays these high energy high energy
particles called cosmic rays they're
accelerated by these bunched up shocked
up magnetic fields okay there you go
shocked up that's a that's a St that's a
that is a madeup phrase shocked up just
like you jacked I'm shocked I'm shocked
up baby exactly tell you right now all
right so in that one sentence you you
mentioned gamma rays and cosmic rays and
shock waves yeah right all of this and
this is high energy phenomenon is where
you're coming from here so what's your
best way to create high energy
phenomenon I know we can do it in
laborat in the accelerators right yeah
so does our understanding of the acceler
in the accelerator help us in what in
your job actually it really does so once
we had the large hydron collider going
MH in Switzerland the CERN CERN yeah mhm
so from the rates of you know the
bajillions of collisions that they're
doing there uh we were able to figure
out the the basically the interaction
rate of of protons at those High
energies and that that made actually my
models of those proton proton collisions
in the interstellar medium a little more
accurate uh which was kind of nice but
we work at way higher energies than we
you mean the universe the universe
yeah's taking credit for the universe
that is the super mega Royal people my
stars my yeah the Royal Wii if there
ever was one exactly and so so you
accelerating protons to much higher
energies than even the most powerful
accelerators on Earth yeah that's right
okay and now they're fast moving can a
single proton make a shock wave no right
what goes on there no you need a wave of
them I mean a bunch of them yeah yeah
you need a bunch of them and but as long
as they find another proton out there
like an ambient proton which is just a
hydrogen atom ambient Ambient proton
right yeah these are the Sleepy
ones one's not looking ambient Ambient
okay so if there's just an Interstellar
Cloud out there it's just hydrogen
mining its own business it's hanging out
gets whacked by one of these high energy
protons that'll create a bunch of other
particles it's a nuclear reaction and
just like you get at the particle
accelerators and all these things come
out these pons come out some are
positively charged some are negative
they call all those daughter products
sure but never Sun products I was
wondering what daughters very rarely
disappoint Sons often do I wonder if it
was Marie curri that did that oh that
makes sense good one interesting so cool
if it was it would be yeah and it's
datable to that point in time right oh
for sure cuz that's when we see
the to see the X where the alpha beta
and gamma rays were first named when we
didn't know what they were that's just
the first three letters of the Greek
alphabet makes sense yeah so they were
just some source of energy moving out of
your experiment into somewhere else so
an alpha Rays became what what did we
discover those to be those are helium
nuclei yeah that's kind of weird but all
right the nucleus of a helium at Alpha
Rays okay we just call them Rays because
we didn't know because we can't we
couldn't distinguish the energy of a
wave from the energy of a particle wow
those idiot
okay Alpha Beta turned out to be
electrons just electrons just electrons
we go from the helium nucleus right to
an electron see that ain't right that's
wild wild they had a really interesting
result though because they had a a a
whole bunch of different energies of
electrons of beta Rays would come out
and that led enrio fery to say there
must be something else carrying this
extra energy and that turned out to be
some little tiny massless particle with
no charge which is a nutr nutrino it was
little
a little one which yeah the Eno the Eno
makes it makes it little and Neutra is
neutral yeah right so there was the
energy budget was not resolved that's
right that's in the there was always
some leftover so yeah okay so is that
the residual the nutrino itself yeah
yeah that's a that's a that's a gangster
prediction bad right if you say we're
missing energy therefore there's a
particle with no charge that carried it
away that we didn't detect that's that's
like making up totally just to fill
in the blank yeah and it turned out to
be ex the case wild M now that's very
cool man it is all right so now tell me
the proton hits what to then make a
shower of other particles another proton
another proton yeah okay and so it it
busted open the proton and what I my
classical knowledge of nuclear physics
ends with the quarks that are inside
yeah but uh I guess you can pair up
quarks and make particles that are not
protons but are lighter than protons
yeah yeah so well pair them up yes I
guess I I don't know yeah so I mean from
this reaction from the proton proton
interaction you end up primarily you get
muons oh you'll get some pons primarily
pons are the ones that that interest me
the most there's there's positive ones
negative ones and neutral ones the
neutral ones with no charge they
immediately Decay into two gamma ray
which is usually what we see so there's
a whole chart of what's going on there
that you need to be fluent in otherwise
you don't know what the hell's going on
yeah kind of
okay uh remind us about muons because
I'm fascinated that they exist at all
yeah because they're they're very
shortlived and so this's this is one of
these interesting can you quantify that
shortlived can I quantify that I mean
shortlived a few seconds a few micros
seconds way smaller way way faster even
shorter than that okay in fact the time
it takes a a a muon to reach the surface
of the Earth from space from from the
atmosphere where they're created by
these cosmic rays hit in the atmosphere
they shouldn't live to get to this
surface traveling at almost the speed of
light they shouldn't make it and yet
they do H and this was one they should
have decayed before say they're yeah
okay but the trick is that they're
traveling so fast that their clock's at
a different speed than ours oh that's
amazing that stuff so you have muons in
your exotic places in the universe M but
I hear that we also detect muans here on
Earth oh yeah so what's going on there
so you'll get one of these energetic
cosmic rays will come in and hit
something in our atmosphere so it's the
same phenomenon exactly right happening
to us the Earth's atmosphere is a bright
bright Gamay background in fact so um
that particle shower these extensive air
showers cuz it busted open the proton
okay they'll they'll come flying in and
those muons will stream down to the
surface a thousand just went through
your body wow another another thousand
oh oh another
thousand but the interesting thing is
their their lifetime is so short that
they shouldn't make it that trip from
the top of the atmosphere down to here
they should Decay before they H before
they hit the earth then why do they make
it well because they're traveling so
fast that their clock is running at a
different speed than ours that's amazing
so they actually don't know any
better so Einstein was right so it's Rel
time D time dilation right here on Earth
it's you gotta love science people you
just got to love it yeah can't argue
with he blows a gasket every now and
then you got to let you got to recover
from that so phenomenal and muons they
behave like electrons right yeah yeah
except there could be posi ones too well
they're
different thank
you they're fundamentally different I
mean they they've got Mass they're not a
a fundamental particle like an electron
things like that yeah but but they're
analogous to an electron and why yeah
well there are muons with negative
charges electrons have negative charges
um but if you leave a muon alone it'll
Decay and you you can get an electron
from that um so in a way you could you
could think that an electron's kind of
hiding inside a muon okay that's uh
that's weird
yeah okay all right so these energetic
phenomena I think because we're
colleagues and I here the most energetic
things I know of are supern noi MH and
then there's hypernova okay what are
those things noi H that would just be a
big ass explosion I don't really know I
mean there there are Supernova that are
just extremely energetic they're hard to
explain it's the badass Supernova yeah
you're right near the Ed is there a
quantifiable magnitude of Nova Supernova
hypernova like that we would be able to
understand as a regular person like
you're not a regular person let's get
that
straight like yeah you know what I mean
like we have a hierarchy of words and
how do they correspond to hierar of
energy is that what you're trying to say
that's what I'm trying to say like how
how would you explain like okay so in
Nova is like 10 nuclear bombs or five
hydrogen bombs or whatever just so that
we could like I wish I had that number
but I think it's more of those bombs
than I could I could could ever even
imagine more bombs you can imagine that
is dope I mean you get 10 to the 53 ergs
from a what we call a type two Supernova
explosion so that's a massive star
that'll explode and end up as a black
hole right that's like a factor of 10 to
the 20 more than a Nova just a little a
little 10 20 more yeah yeah it's a huge
difference fact it in that explosion
correct me if I'm wrong it's emitting
more energy than all the stars in the
galaxy in which it explodes yeah that's
something I mean I think that's right if
the Sun is 10 of 33 ergs per second and
it's 10 of 53 total URS yeah so that's
10 to the 20th more URS the the the one
that I've heard is if you add up all the
energy that the sun will ever emit in
its all in its total lifetime that's
like a supernova that's a supernova yeah
gocha right it's huge yeah that's almost
the same way to all at once all at once
you're looking at 10 billion 15 billion
years of radiation po all at once that's
and that's what so they're visible
Across the Universe so how far away are
your objects are they all in our own
galaxy everything that I've been
studying lately has been in our own
Galaxy but I've also studied other
galaxies but nearby ones mostly but now
I've just started getting into Galaxy
clusters um but still nearby clusters
okay but they're getting kind of far
away now let's just take a moment as we
record this MH in the year 2024 yes that
100 years ago yes Hubble the man not the
telescope discovered that we're not
alone as a galaxy in the universe wow
yeah ended the great debate no he didn't
do the debate no he ended it ended it
the end of the great debate okay the
great debate was are the spiral nebula
just local phenomena in our own Galaxy
or they whole other whole other galaxies
whole other galaxies out there like ours
Island universe and now now we know
there's a whole trillion of them out
there yeah yeah that's amazing they got
out of control look at that so you
mentioned Amery just a moment ago as the
the nutrino the was he the Namer of the
nutrino he must
Italian yeah it's exactly how he said it
too I believe I have a discovery it's
got a nutr exact that's Chuck speaking
Italian as by the way that's yeah that's
every American who's not Italian
speaking Italian and if they were girl
neutrinos they'd be nutras right
wouldn't they that's very cool yeah now
I'm
interested so we tend to name telescopes
after scientists or other people
relevant to our field and I read
recently about the fmy telescope and I
don't know anything about it could you
catch me up on it yeah so it's a Gamay
it's the Gamay Space Telescope Space
Telescope yeah M you got to be in space
because gamma rays will interact with
the Earth's atmosphere so and give you
muons yeah yeah and pons and the whole
gam yeah good stuff uh so it's in space
is this the first Gamay telescope Space
Telescope it is not uh so its
predecessor was the Compton Gamay
Observatory I knew that okay it's the
size of a bus it was a really big one
cuz that it's a bus that fits inside the
space shuttle yeah so just yeah so it's
not that it just fit in it's designed to
just fit
in that's your size make it fit yeah
that's that's your whole payload that's
the whole that's the whole payload right
there at the time and it may still hold
the record it was the heaviest thing
that the shuttle ever launched really
wow okay but you need a heavy detector
like that to stop the gamma rays you
know to detect them it's it's in essence
the firmy gam Space Telescope is a
particle detector okay but it could also
know what direction it's coming from
right that's right so it it detects when
a photon comes in and it's one Photon at
a time G Photon so one phot when the
photon comes in uh where it came from as
best as it can you're counting one
Photon at a time one at a time that's
insane they rare you this is the highest
energy stuff you need you need something
special to create it and so yeah they're
pretty rare man they just just dish
amount just here here one for you man
one for you one for you we got a photon
guys guys they're looking over here let
me TOS one to those to
those that's pretty wild man I mean when
you talk to solar astronomers oh gosh
you can't even have a conversation yeah
because they have like countless photons
coming from the Sun even us just from
anything from a star you get countless
photons you know so uh these this it's
they're precious one Photon at a time
okay so what will it do that the Compton
Observatory couldn't do firmy was a
great Improvement on that localization
like figuring out what the Direction was
uh so it could pinpoint the direction of
the gamma ray much better that was
really important cuz I think there
there's whole generations of detectors
where they just detect something MH
right and there's no information as
where it came from it just detected it
right right and it was even worse with
with with Compton because the you you
would really like to say oh we detected
a Gamay from this crazy Source but you
couldn't quite pinpoint did it really
come from that crazy Source or not your
uncertainty Circle was huge exactly yeah
okay so now you're doing a little better
oh a lot better yeah yeah yeah uh to you
know a fraction of a degree it still
sounds pretty sloppy so Observer that
you are m space telescopes have high
value to you being above the atmosphere
oh yeah detecting your one particle a
year or whatever your one Lu it's more
than that okay I'm happy to hear how
many total Gamay photons have you
touched in your life oh that that's been
plenty plenty okay yeah uh like I was
saying before and anytime one of those
cosmic ray protons hits an ambient
proton and the Galaxy is full of those
gas clouds um they light up oh God okay
yeah so it's a actually it's a strong
background it's a strong backgr okay all
right so you use the the fery telescope
in what way I've lately been studying
well things that you can't detect oddly
enough um so there's there's all these
different Gamay you're detecting it with
gamma rays mean you think you can't
detect with a regular telescope no no
you can there are are right sources of
Gamay like pulsars and star forming
galaxies and things like that but you
know if you look at all the pulsars that
are out there there's about 5,000 or so
that have been detected in the radio and
many of them are detected as Gamay
sources as well but only a couple of
hundred about 300 H so what are the
other 4,000 or so doing we suspected
that they would also be good sources of
gamma rays and so we were looking at all
the gamma ray just a weaker Source yeah
yeah so we were looking at all the
undetected pulsars and gamma rays and
stacking that signal together to see if
as a population they actually are gamma
ray sources and uh trying to trying to
you know figure out what their
properties you are improving the signal
to noise of your data yeah exactly it's
the signal compared to the noise we're
trying to reduce the background so every
time you stack the noise slowly cancels
itself because it's not additive right
the ups and the Downs cancel you have a
signal however low if it's really there
every next time you're gonna boost it
it's Amplified it's Amplified and every
next time you're gonna Tamp down the
noise right in real practice with a
particle detector like this the
background just always adds up too it
does oh man but you do get a persistent
additional signal from your Source
population so we stack them both you
have to beat it you have to beat it yeah
we stack them both okay uh stack the
background compare it to our targets and
then we we get a signal above the
background yeah okay and so so in the
inventory of objects or phenomena that
are in these cataloges that emerge from
the Stacked data is it something other
than a pulsar or supernova or are you
discovering new kinds of objects maybe
because Pulsar is at very low gamy
luminosities some people say they
shouldn't do that and we're discovering
that we're seeing them that these low
spin down they're called low spin down
uh pulsars are actually potential
sources of Gamay emission U so there's
just a lot that we don't know about the
Gamay production of pulsars it comes out
in a wacky area of their magnetosphere
and does it feel good when Sor can you
just just for the sake of the people who
may not know cuz I know for others yeah
for the other people like what is a
pulsar and why is it so important when
you talk about spin yeah so a pulsar is
um uh the densest kind of object in the
universe that we can measure it's all
the it's all the superlatives like that
right it is the densest we're talking
something a couple of times the mass of
the Sun but the size of Queens okay so
super compact wild can't go any more
compact or you get a black hole Queens a
burrow of New York City so it's for
international it's a black hole that you
can actually observe or right before a
black hole that you can actually observe
exactly yeah so super dense because of
that it has an incredibly high surface
gravity right so like 100 trillion times
the surface gravity that's keeping us in
our seats right now oh so if you weighed
a pound right right here you'd weigh a
100 trillion pounds on the surface of a
neutron star you'd be flat as a flat
exactly right you'd be a g spot spot
that's all not even a flapjack just a SP
not even a
tortilla be a little spot but then they
pulse right this pulsing is that they're
spinning around really super crazy fast
also some of the fastest spinning things
they spin faster than a blender okay
double the mass of the Sun the size of
Queens size of Queens spinning faster
than a blender yeah wow yeah it's pretty
nuts spinning so fast they could almost
fly to pieces I mean they're they're
it's that fast because of that fast Spin
and that high compression they have
these powerful powerful magnetic fields
like trillion times higher than the
magnet that's on your fridge and that
generates these intense electrical
Fields that'll accelerate particles just
like the particles at the particle
accelerator particle accelerator the
universe as a particle accelerator look
at that and even though the surface
gravity is so high any particles that
are that are near the surface and these
are just electrons and stuff like that
they will be um instead of falling to
the surface despite that high gravity
they get shot off at almost the speed of
light because of the intense Electric
magnetic fields look at that so that
means we understand gamy burst is that
what you're saying that's a stretch but
all right so a gamy burst is a different
thing so this is this is uh during a
stellar explosion like a supernova
something happens as the core of that
star collapses and then anytime a
scientist says something happens yeah
right we're gapping GA ignorant there's
a whole ignorant Valley there right
there's a whole world inside of
something happens well people are
modeling it and getting pretty good at
it there's a student in our group a
master student who's been doing these
Gamay uh burst explosions but master's
degree
yeah not just a master of the universe
or Master Class kind of cool though
master degree student yes that' be the
degree they should give you as an
astrophysicist you are now a master of
the universe that I am in favor of
change that for sure well let's let's
look at our Cosmic queries and see what
came in Chuck you have them all I have
them right here you got them all Bring
It On yeah well let's start with uh
Haywood from Atlanta Georgia says
heywood's asked before I think Heywood
yeah he says hello
Chuck uh just wondering do Gamay bur
start slowly and build over time or are
they instantaneous and by that I think
he means not the actual
explosion but the leadup to because
there's no such thing as a slow moving
burst right it wouldn't you wouldn't
call it a burst you wouldn't call it a
burst at that point so leading up to the
actual you know expulsion of what you
just talked about what's that process do
we have an idea of what that process is
yeah yeah so it's the the collapse of a
massive star down to a black hole
presumably um but then instead of just
like this spherical explosion that you
might picture um it's actually uh you
get a jet couple of jets of explosive
material basically that that blast out
of the star and they tend to be those
Jets tend to be pointed right at us and
that gives you um a lot of that that gam
that high energy emission once it breaks
out of the Star right but it seconds it
seconds it's a pretty really rapid rise
and then there's a slight fade but it's
still seconds maybe tens of seconds and
those are so-called long Gamay bursts
there are shorter ones that are much
much quicker tens of seconds and that's
the longest wa wait so how do you know
it's that short has anyone witnessed
that yeah yeah we see the light curves
of their their explosion and then the
the so somebody's looking at it before
it explodes and then they see it while
it's exploding in those tens of seconds
even though the sky is vast and we not
not enough astronomers in the world to
look at every Star at all times but you
had people looking at the right star at
the right time well not just people the
fmy gam Space Telescope has an
instrument that's looking at the whole
Sky all the time oh there you go okay so
it wasn't a pointed observations it was
a it was a broad it's part of a survey
survey okay exactly all right give me
more Chuck let's keep moving let's go uh
with wara or R Rama Rama who says hello
Dr Tyson professor pagon and Lord nice
Andrew here from Cork in Ireland and
then he says I suppose it's in gaay uh a
thousand welcome 100 thousand welcomes
and I'm not going to try to pronounce
that sorry buddy uh he goes my question
for you today is can you explain how the
properties of the largest molecular
clouds in galaxies influence star
formation rates and the overall dynamics
of galaxies I love it okay that's a
great question that's a really great
question yeah this is where I I started
before doing the gamma rays uh was
studying these star formation and giant
molecular PhD on that yeah yeah in fact
there's not not a word of gamma rays
went into my PhD thesis but um the one
paper I did as a grad student on it was
one of my most highly cited papers it's
kind of funny and now I all I do is
gaming I was waiting for fmy to get
launched yeah the star formation happens
in these giant molecular clouds and so
that's that's where all the action is so
yeah the properties of the molecular
clouds definitely determines how it all
plays out wow and do the uh any of these
other phenomena like I don't know the
Collision of black holes or these pulsar
ejections and all of these particles
that are excited and then jetted Across
the Universe do they ever perturb these
other you know like clouds and things to
cause something that we can observe or
you know it's interesting when you're
talking about black holes and this and
that I was I'm I'm rolling in my head
I'm like no no no no but the cosmic rays
that we've been talking about they can
penetrate into the molecular clouds
deeper than anything else okay and
provide a source of heat and what we've
noticed is that molecular clouds are a
little hotter than one might predict
they should be really coolor there and
so there seems to have always been an
additional source of ionization source
of heating and cosmic rays are that
Source okay and this is one of the
things that keeps me going in cosmic ray
astrophysics is is seeing what the
contribution of cosmic rays are to
Galaxy Evolution and uh molecular cloud
Evolution star formation so MC clouds
can be huge that means they have a lot
of gravity M does that enough gravity to
influence other clouds or they just into
its own thing interesting uh I mean they
can merge and do other stuff but they
they tend to be really you know subject
to the overall dynamics of of the Galaxy
so they'll follow the G the um
gravitational potential of of the Galaxy
all right this is Ilia Ilia says hello
Dr Tyson Professor Pelon and anyone else
who might be there
thanks your title is Lord this is true
yes uh here's a question from beautiful
Portland Oregon from The Limited
knowledge uh gamma is the highest Photon
energy we have encountered in the
universe but we have also produced
photons with much higher levels in
particle accelerators here on Earth does
the equipment you use in your studies
have the capacity to detect and
differentiate such
particles but the truth is have we
really no you can't compete with the
cosmos man no they totally have us beat
so the cosmos is a they and that sense
I'm just sure how you're personifying
the universe the LHC is able to bang
together protons at I think it's like 14
uh Terra electron volts which is just a
whole crapload of electron volts it's
very high energy but we've got there
sources out there that work A Thousand
Times Higher thousand times yeah we're
getting cosmic rays and and uh there
there are gamma rays that we're seeing
from from sources that we truly don't
understand how they can be that
energetic isn't that our best evidence
that the large hydron collider would not
create many black holes that would eat
earth when they turned on the switch oh
that's an interesting question yeah
because the energetics of the collider
though High pale compared to the actual
collisions happening in our actual
atmosphere yeah and so you can't worry
that that's going to turn us into a
black hole when you have higher energy
reactions that are happening right above
us all the time all the time yeah that
makes sense I think the record is 20
teev for the highest energy Photon
detected on the earth it might might be
higher now but that requires a process
or a particle that's even more energetic
and so they're out there they're out
there and we can't touch that can't
touch it can't touch
this so this is Kayla B uh Badu she says
salutations from Lafayette Louisiana
Kyla here curious about gamma ray
telescopes how exactly do they work are
they used to investigate and why do we
never hear about them I know how come
cuz you don't make pretty pictures it's
got to be it uh people like pictures
yeah that's true I had three photons
today does not make a headline oh yeah
the pictures are kind of grainy um I'll
admit that but you know we usually Tim
that's why there's Photoshop yeah yeah
or artist's impression yeah you know
it's a particle detector so the particle
comes in it goes through these uh these
layers of of tungsten basically and
it'll create a a particle anti-particle
pair and that pair travels through the
tracker the so-called tracker and that
lets us know where the where it came
from oh and then it lands in this
silicon calorimeter which is just an
energy measurer and um that's the way it
works all right so that's super cool man
so tell tell us about a calorimeter so
the the particle eventually ends up in
this this calorimeter and that's that's
just overall measuring the total energy
okay gotcha like a collection plate so
you know we like I said we get three
things it's root is calorie right yeah
calorie is energy calorimeter calorie so
it's heat yeah or energy energy energy
right yeah exactly which can manifest
can manifest heat but it's energy
excellent technically heat is exchanged
energy gotcha yeah cool all right you
see how specific these scientists are
people you see what a pain in the ass
this
is but it facilitates efficient
communication that I cannot disagree
with thing right all right here we go
this is Christopher Stow who says hi
chrisen Pennsylvania here my question is
about the chemistry that occurs in these
huge clouds is there complex chemistry
occurring in the nebula or is the
material too diffused for this to happen
this guy knows what he's talking about
that's really insightful dude knows what
he's talking about here it is diffuse
extremely diffuse you might in a dense
molecular cloud you might have a
thousand particles in a cub centimeter
so the size of a d you know so that's
not much so they don't interact a lot a
die mean a dice dice one one one dice
right so yeah the the chemistry is there
but it's slow gas phase chemistry is
just really slow slow because of the
separation among the the the frequency
of interaction is so low yeah it's the
experimenting is not sensibly happening
on a sensible time scale yeah you can't
make a compound out of two atoms if they
don't meet up you know so it's just yeah
just slow it happens and you can get
complex molecules but it's it's slow and
molecular clouds don't live that long oh
yeah millions of years they're a little
transient so gotta no I'm sorry that was
an astronomical time scale there that's
that's fast right so okay there you
go but don't live so what happens to
them well they could collapse to form
stars or they could dissipate or be
disrupted they're all very turbulent so
they could just fly to Pieces okay yeah
okay all right this is uh
SAA
minin SAA Minkin who says hello I'm
guessing it's not that yeah I mean how
about this I'm just guessing sa Minkin
okay how about that uh hello from the
distant snowy lands of Finland my name
is Saia Minkin and pronounce Saia oh
guess who got it right okay for once had
it wrong the first time until you said
maybe not uh the last name sorry I can't
help you there Chuck
okay Jack you
jackass all right here you go sa here's
my question if there are regions in the
Galaxy where stars are born and die very
quickly could these star bursts in some
way be considered the vital functions of
galaxies themselves in other words do
they act as the breathing or the pulse
of galaxies shaping their life cycle and
their evolution boy you sound like
you've been working with Neil for a
while yeah that's a great question and
and it's it's kind of the thing that
that got me into the Galaxy cluster
project of the Galaxy because Galaxy's
form uh from infalling gas and things
like that but then there's also this
process of feedback because you get
Supernova explosions and things like
that or Stellar winds and when it's all
happening in one burst like that you can
get these giant super bubbles or
Galactic scale winds that are coming out
of galaxies and then um receding their
their neighborhood and even turning off
the star formation so it's all regulated
by these feedback mechanisms that's wild
they also generate cosmic rays which can
carry away a bunch of the energy as well
it's another thing I've been looking at
very very cool great question Saia way
to go I'll forgive you for making fun of
me all right uh this is Michael Kemp who
says greeting Dr Tyson Lord nice Dr pon
pon uh P Pon sorry rhymes with telephone
I tell p uh Michael Kemp here from soggy
Oregon Coast range in the southwest of
Eugene James Webb Space Telescope has
imag tons of supernova H from the early
Universe are these early Supernova uh
different from the ones occurring in our
universe today it thanks a
lot what would make them change
wow it's a great question uh it's it's
actually a big problem uh what we assume
is that they're the same as Supernova
that we know and love the ones that
we're really familiar with that are
nearby and we're kind of hoping that
they probably are the same so that we
understand what they're like right now
what he's referring to though there's
been dozens of new transients discovered
by the jameswood Space Telescope so
things thatl trans yeah things that just
blinked on and then went away oh get out
yeah that don't repeat transient like an
explosion that's wild mhm okay that's
but that's crazy though so we presumed
they're Supernova but we're actually
still I think they're still studying
what the heck they are okay this is
really new stuff I mean this guy's up on
yeah he's up on his stuff way to go
Michael Kemp look at that you impressed
the doctor here okay all right this is
Gavin Bamber who says hello from North
Vancouver please visit us okay thanks
for the invitation expecting my plane
ticket
uh was our son a star that was formed
from the de the debris of a massive star
if so or not how many dying stars does
it take to form a new
star interesting so yeah we're
definitely a second generation we the
sun is definitely a second generation
star what we call it a population one
star even though it's second generation
two came first I don't know
but pop two came first pop one came
second yeah okay deal with it that's
weird there's pop three now also which
were the first
Stars that's in ridiculous anyway well
the sun is definitely a pop one star so
it has heavier elements in it like
magnesium and whatnot you know and these
things come from uh exploding stars and
other other you know evolved Stellar
things so yeah for sure we're from the
debris of a lot of different Stars
though so all all that um you you know
when a star explodes or throws off its
outer layers when it's a giant or things
like that you know that all goes back in
in the interstellar medium eventually
forms another giant molecular cloud and
then forms the next generation of stars
Falls in and forms the star that's
pretty well next gen next gen Gen
X I love it let's start
naming population one two that's not
catchy yeah it really is just start all
right uh this is Alysa Feld house Alysa
Alysa Feld hos who says Alyssa from
Rocket City Huntsville here uh Dr Pon
can we trace the features in younger
galaxies directly to these early
Starburst galaxies and might they be
considered
progenitors of the galaxies we observe
today and why why pray tell is my
favorite candy named after them thanks
for keeping me up okay Starburst
Starburst right there you have some on
your desk over there very nice look at
that I mean the answer to her question
in short is yeah this when you know
you're in a real astrophysicist
office you see some Starbursts sitting
around anyway here you want one there
you go I think that's just a cool name I
I'm not in the marketing uh marketing
firm for these guys but yeah yeah just
went for it yeah in astronomy uh Neil
wrote about this a long time ago you
know we we use simplistic naming you
know we're not we're not super fancy
with the names if there's a burst of
star formation in a galaaxy we call call
it a starburst Galaxy you know I me get
right to the point but yeah I mean the
earliest galaxies were forming a lot of
stars they were smaller obviously and
really messed up and uh and yeah we we
try to make those connections but the
star formation rate in earlier in the
universe was a lot higher than it is
today so you know things were we're
we're we're definitely interested in
trying to tie all those together cool I
time for one more question chck all
right let's go to our buddy Alejandro
Renos
he's from hackin sack New
Jersey not the big king Alejandro Roso
from monter
Mexico hello or should I say hola does
there's that on
there oh he says this my question is how
massive stars how do they behave
different from our son is the only
difference in how they die
no it's also in how they're born and how
they live so it's everything yeah
massive stars do everything just Fest so
let's talk about how they're born
because that's pretty dog on interesting
well it's the same way the Sun or or a
low mass star is born it's a collapse of
a molecular cloud right the but the
massive star just does it faster because
of the mass because of all the mass
gravity so just all happens faster all
right so now I'm this big giant fat
Superstar and I'm just burning away baby
what am I doing differently than the
kind of star that we have and then what
am I doing differently than like a brown
dwarf like a little boring ass brown
dwarf star it's the burning away baby
that you were talking about it's the
burning yeah it's all in the burning so
the Sun at the core but just to be clear
we don't use the word burn the same way
the chemist does of course of course you
wouldn't chemist burn is a chemical
reaction right usually involving oxygen
right where it's exothermic and releases
we say burn right but we don't mean burn
what you really mean is what well we're
reacting we mean thermonuclear fusion
fusion yes so it's loose tongue it's
just loose tongue we we we all guilty of
that so I slipped that in there okay so
here you are you're doing your
thermonuclear Fusion yes and we talking
about hydrogen burning right that's
hydrogen burning so that's what the sun
is doing yeah burning hydrogen and
creating helium right so it's helium
helium so what's what's the big fat guy
doing so they have enough Mass to
compress the core to higher temperatures
so that they can burn helium into carbon
oh or even better burn carbon into
oxygen oh or even better the next one
and the next one and the next one until
you get up to iron so they're just
making all these elements yeah as they
burn yep whoa
nucleosynthesis
nucleosynthesis so that is not just a
part of the dying process before they
become explode that's the living proc
the living process interesting yeah and
that each one of those is very energetic
process so they burn fast and so even
though you know they have more mass and
so you would think oh with more fuel in
the tank you'd last longer no they they
burn it up really really fast way fter
yeah they're super luminous I mean they
could be um thousands of times uh more
luminous than the Sun and so they're
shining they're giving off energy that
much faster now does the size compensate
for the longevity or do they just burn
out quicker they burn out quicker oh
they might only last 10 million years oh
yeah instead of a trillion right yes
yeah so this is why when Star
formation's happening massive star
formation it's instantaneous if you see
a massive there are no old massive stars
look at that they just aren't it's
better to burnout than it is to fade
away
what's that from that's that's that's
Highlander no I yes there another one
really that's Highlander that has two
catchphrases it's not there can be only
one that that is the number one
catchphrase but the anti-hero in the
movie that's his line it's better to
burn out than it is to fade away song
that has that it's better to burn out
than to fade away it's still young oh
young hey hey my favorite Highlander
line is actually it hurts doesn't it he
stabs him in the
neck that's your favorite yeah cuz it's
kind of cruel cuz he knows you won't die
just stabbed him the neck okay hurts
doesn't it wow so big giant Stars they
live fast and die young absolutely
awesome yeah even though they had more
fuel even though they have more fuel
they're like gas guzzling L yachs of the
1960s and 70s I like to think of they
had bigger gas tanks but they would not
go as far as the smaller gas tank they
got better gas mileage that's right same
analysis very cool uh let me see if I
can reflect on our conversation yeah
with a cosmic perspective okay what has
always fascinated Me With Science in
general but astrophysics in
particular is that there are things you
know and love and see that you have
telescopes and detectors and you
hypothesize what's there and you get
more better data and you figure it out
then you realize you're still
only
limited by the power of your
tools
and you wait we actually wait until a
bigger telescope comes along a better
telescope comes along a more powerful
particle accelerator comes along that
could reach
into zones of the universe that were
previously
unknown and so for me it's not just
about how clever are you with what we
already know it's you got to bring in
the engineers at some point to build the
thing to be able to even see where you
had never imagined was even possible and
that's where the significant growth in a
field comes from not only from brilliant
people thinking about stuff we already
know about it comes from brilliant
technologies that could take us where
not only where we've never been on
occasion where we've never even dreamt
of and that's a cosmic
perspective Tim thanks for coming hey
thank you thanks for making the trip
from
upstairs here at the Rose Center for
Earth in space Hayden planetarium
American Museum in Natural History
that's your visitor's office right
because you you're based at York College
that's right yeah so thanks for coming
time you're here Chuck always good to
see you man always a pleasure all right
this has been Star Talk Cosmic queries
the extreme energy Edition until next
time keep looking up
[Music]